let's bring in Sami Al Aran he directs
the center for Islam and Global Affairs
at Istanbul Zim University U thank you
for joining us in the studio this hour
look going this is day one of Ramadan
going into this holy month for Muslims
there was a a question that now seems
naive of whether that might provide some
momentum for a ceasefire in Gaza for an
easing of tensions uh maybe even for
more humanitarian Aid to be brought in
clearly the answer is no absolutely I
mean this is not the first Ramadan that
Israel would violate I mean in 2021 same
thing happened they were violating you
know people's rights all over including
their right to Worship in the laka
Masque in 2021 there was a huge war was
during Ramadan as well but Ramadan of
course is a special month a special
occasion and special season for many
people and now they are facing
particular people in Gaza a month where
people are supposed to feel for The
Afflicted for the hungry for the people
who are not having shelters and yet all
this happen happens in Gaza and we have
a month without ceasefire continuous
bombardment continuous killing
continuous uh uh starvation Mass
starvation taking place with nothing
taking place so it's a very sad moment
uh to have and to see what's happening
in Gazza today especially in the midst
of Ramadan what's the calculus for
Israel when they see Ramadan approaching
on the calendar how do they factor that
in in their decision- making
unfortunately Israel does not see the
Palestinians are human beings they said
that they are human animals they do not
see the Human Side of Palestinians they
have been violating their rights left
and right but what they see here is
pressure on the resistance so that they
can give up the demands that they have
been trying to get from them uh
regarding the ceasefire or not ceasefire
actually cation of hostilities because
so far they have not accepted the
concept of ceasefire with the resistance
with Palestinians they want to continue
until they fulfill their objectives
which is basically to uh uh devastate to
kill to to to to undermine and to an
annihilate the the resistance and also
to uh try to force some sort of
Palestinian surrender whether by having
a an evacuation that is is is uh
voluntary or forced are you saying I
want to make sure I got this right are
you saying that Israel sees Ramadan as
possibly putting more pressure on Hamas
and therefore as as they see they see it
as a time when they can G benefit from
this I don't see any doubt about this
because even President Biden has been
trying to tell them please stop
something six weeks at least let Ramadan
be a peaceful uh month this time around
and they continue to say no but the
there's a calculus around Al axam mosque
specifically isn't there because
Netanyahu had a decision to make he had
within his cabinet the security minister
national security minister itamar bav
who wanted to severely restrict access
to Alamos and was pleading with
Netanyahu to do that to implement that
policy on the other hand shinb the
domestic security service was telling
Netanyahu this is not in Israel's
interest to do this and could cause
further further tensions Netanyahu in in
the end sided with shinette and said
there will be no more restrictions on
alaka this year during this Ramadan than
there were last year I think there is a
misconception also about what Netanyahu
is allowing or not allowing what benav
is trying to do was to not allow any
Palestinian even those who are have
Israeli citizens of going there unless
they are of certain age and what n says
now these people will be able to go
there we're not going to put
restrictions but there will be security
restrictions on the people of the West
Bank in which the overwhelming majority
of men would not be allowed which is the
same thing that's been happening every
year except for certain occasions which
would be towards the end last 10 days of
Ramadan or whenever there aren't
settlers in in the compound but there is
not unfettered access to Ala mosque for
the Palestinians who live in the West
Bank and remember West Bank is not a a
war zone it's not Hamas you know
invested Zone and yet all these
restrictions are taking place in Ramadan
by the Israelis yeah and 400
Palestinians have been killed killed
there since October 7th that's exactly
right and plus 7,300 people have been
arrested have been absolutely without
any charges
um is alaa alaa has typically been a
flasho in the Israeli Palestinian
conflict do you expect this to be the
case again this Ramadan it was for
instance back in 2021 right the previous
war between Israel and Hamas it was one
of the causes that that triggered that
war actually if you see the the October
7th operation was called the FL SOA has
always been at the center of this
conflict uh the organization of Islamic
conference or now the organization of
Islamic cooperation was created in 1969
because of Al AA there was a somebody
who tried to burn Al AA mosque back in
1969 and that's how this organization
was was born because of the immense uh
sacredness and Holiness of this place
for Muslims worldwide all right samel
Aran thank you very much you're the
director of the center for Islam and
Global Affairs at Istanbul Z University
thank you for joining us in the studio
today thank you